---
layout: project
title: Boeing 737 Max Ethics Analysis
description: An analysis of the Boeing 737 Max disaster from an ethics perspective
technologies: [Ethics, MAE ASME Canons]
image: /assets/images/function-graph.png
---


March 18th, 2019 changed forever the world’s perception of aviation and of the engineers they put their trust in. The trustworthiness of passenger aircraft, and of the companies that designed them, would not be perceived the same from that day on. For it was on March 18th, 2019 that all 387 of the Boeing 737 Max aircraft owned by various airlines were grounded. By grounding the aircraft, the FAA indirectly confirmed to the world that the two crashes of the Boeing 737 Max on October 29th, 2019 and March 10th 2019, taking the lives of 346 people, were not caused by pilot error. These crashes were caused by a series of poor decisions made. Five of the unethical issues that contributed to the occurrence of this disaster will be discussed below.

The first question to be discussed is: Should Boeing management be allowed to pressure engineers to prioritize timeline and profit over thorough engineering decisions? The stakeholders that are affected by this question and by the answer to it include the management themselves, the engineers being pressured, the marketing team, the FAA, airlines, pilots, and passengers. The main source for understanding such ethical issues, which will be reused throughout the following discussions, is the “ASME Code of Ethics of Engineers”. Of the fundamental canons, canons 1 and 4 seem to be the most relevant for this particular issue. Based on ASME Canon 1, the primary concern of the engineers should always be human safety. By merging Boeing with McDonnell Douglas, the company culture started to shift through the new leadership carrying over the culture from McDonnell Douglas. One of these effects was said to be the ‘for profit’ culture; by making profit the main goal repeatedly discussed internally may have made individuals instinctively think of profit and not of safety while working. And with this question evaluated against the ASME canons, it becomes clear that there is a conflict of interest between Canon 1 and the engineers who are pressured by their management to prioritize profit first and foremost, which is where Canon 4 becomes prevalent. If safety was the company’s priority, this relevant issue would not have come up, and therefore this question would not need to be asked when evaluating what may have contributed to the disaster.

The second question to be discussed is: Should the company be required to converse with pilots beyond those directly employed by the company when developing training manuals? The stakeholders that are affected by this question and by the answer to it include Boeing management, the airline pilots, test pilots, and the FAA. Of the fundamental canons, canons 1, 2, and 4 are applicable. If safety was prioritized as per canon 1, the chances of this issue going unaddressed would have been lower as more people interacting with the new plane increases the likelihood that the concerns with MCAS would have been raised and addressed. As MCAS affects how the plane flies - which engineers are not experts with (canon 2) - more subject matter experts should have been consulted to thoroughly vet the issue properly. As more test pilots would have been expensive, this now raises a conflict of interest concern (canon 4) between the engineers who have been pressured to prioritize profit and the ASME canons themselves, which likely would have led the engineers to a different decision than what was made. Overall, if the company had prioritized getting this new design into the hands of as many qualified test pilots as possible before releasing the plane for purchase, the chances of it being released with the MCAS issues it had would have been much lower.

The third question to be discussed is: Should senior engineers within Boeing have stepped in to prevent Boeing management from allowing airlines to continue flying the Boeing 737 max after the first crash? The stakeholders for this question include the senior engineers, the passengers who perished in the second crash, the pilots, airlines, and Boeing stakeholders / investors / management. Of the fundamental canons, canons 1, 2, 4, and 7 are especially relevant here. If the company and the engineers working for the company were truly prioritizing the passenger safety as per canon 1, they wouldn’t have had the people who weren’t the experts on the hardware (the management) make decisions regarding hardware safety as per canon 2. Yet again there is a conflict of interest (canon 4) between Canon 1 and the engineers who are pressured by their management to prioritize profit first and foremost - grounding the planes would be an expensive decision. And if all of the information and potential concerns with MCAS were released to the public after the crash, the public themselves likely would have pressured Boeing to ground the planes, possibly preventing the second crash. Non-experts decided the plane was safe to fly again when in reality that was not true.

The fourth question to be discussed is: Should internal employees be able to regulate their own company on behalf of an external organization? The relevant stakeholders are primarily the engineers and the FAA, along with the airlines that bought 737s and the Boeing management. Of the fundamental canons, yet again canons 1, 2, 4, and 7 are applicable for this discussion. Canons 1 and 2 are relevant as engineers aren’t regulation experts; they aren’t ethically the best people to be regulating aircraft design to verify it is fully safe for passengers. The conflict of interest between the internal regulators and the company that pays them is a pretty large concern when considering canon 4 as an engineer. And again, like with the third question, publicized information on relevant information leading up to these crashes increases the chance that someone else would have caught the concern. Certified regulators would likely have more experience with regulating and investigating hardware design, and with that on top of being less biased, could have caught what was missed in the original certifications.

The last question to be discussed is: Should pilots have the ability to directly override control software? This is an especially relevant question as later investigations performed following the disaster revealed the pilots had no way to truly override MCAS, and theoretically if they could have easily overridden MCAS, this issue could have been prevented. This is a big ethical dilemma because there are viable arguments for both sides: restricting pilots and how much control they have inhibits safety as they are the primary subject matter experts on flying, but the engineers are the subject matter experts on the control systems and design for the plane, and may deem the software as something that shouldn’t be overridden from how they’ve designed it. The stakeholders for this issue are the FAA, the pilots, engineers, and passengers. The primary canons for this issue are canons 1 and 2: the engineers did not thoroughly interact with the pilots (the SMEs) during the development of the 737 Max and therefore didn’t fully understand the kind of control the pilots would want for their software. MCAS is likely something that could have be overridden in absolute emergency situations without too much issue but that wasn’t an option for the pilots. If the true SMEs (the pilots) were more heavily involved, different decisions likely would have been made over what should be in the pilot’s control versus the software’s control in order to prioritize the passenger safety.

There is much to be learned from the Boeing 737 Max disaster as an engineer entering the Aerospace Industry full-time. Understanding and truly committing to the ASME Canons can help reveal workplace ethical issues when they may not be entirely clear. 
